assignment-6.adoc, before:

:doctype: article
:blank: pass:[ +]

:sectnums!:

= DevOps & Cloud Infrastructure: Assignment 6
Jason Baker <bake2352@stthomas.edu>
1.0, 4/8/2016

== Overview
This week we will enable auto scaling for a WordPress web application. The web
application will communicate with a backend database server running on RDS.

Like the previous assignment, you will have to work through some of the detailed
steps to complete the requirements. If you get stuck on a step, do a little
research on the AWS documentation site or reach out to the class on Slack.

== Requirements

You need to have a personal AWS account and GitHub account for this assignment.

== The assignment

Let's start scaling.

=== Create VPC and subnets

Each assignment in this course has been less prescriptive than the previous
and this assignment is no different. By now, you should understand how to configure
a VPC, subnets, routing tables, an internet gateway, an elastic load balancer, and
EC2 instances. You will create all of these components and more in this week's
assignment. Remember, you can always look back at previous assignments, class
recordings, or online AWS documentation if you get stuck on a step.

You will build a VPC and set of AWS services which conforms to the service
diagram below.
image:images/assignment6/diagram.png["600","600"]

Start the assignment by creating a VPC named `productionVpc` in the `us-west`
region with a CIDR block of `10.0.0.0/16`. The VPC will have two subnets:

  * `production-public-1` subnet located in the `us-west-1a` availability zone
  will use the `10.0.1.0/25` network.
  * `production-public-2` subnet located in the `us-west-1b` availability zone
  will use the `10.0.1.128/25` network.

All instances on the two production subnets will need to be able to communicate with
the Internet. You will need to configure the VPC to allow this communication.

=== Create Security Groups

While you are in the VPC dashboard, go ahead and create a couple security
groups. You will need to use these security groups when launching services
later in the assignment. It's always a good idea to plan out the security
requirements for your services in advance.

Create two security groups called `production-web` and `production-db`. The
first security group will allow all external devices to communicate with
the web server instances via SSH and HTTP. Here are the requirements for the
first security group:

  * production-web
    ** Name tag: production-web
    ** Group name: production-web
    ** Description: production web servers
    ** VPC: productionVPC
    ** Inbound:
      *** SSH from source 0.0.0.0/0
      *** HTTP from source 0.0.0.0/0

The second security group will allow only the web serves to communicate with
the MySQL database instances using port 3306. Here are the requirements for the
second security group:

  * production-db
    ** Name tag: production-db
    ** Group name: production-db
    ** Description: production database servers
    ** VPC: productionVPC
    ** Inbound:
      *** MySQL (3306) from source production-web security group


=== Create RDS database

Wordpress is a very popular Content Management System (CMS) and like most CMS
systems it requires a database to persist content and user account information.
We will use a MySQL database managed by the RDS service to support this
database requirement.

Go to the RDS dashboard on AWS and launch a new MySQL database instance. The
launch wizard may ask you if you plan to use the instance for production or
development purposes. In this case, select the development option. In a real
production scenario you would want to use a database tier that supports
multi-AZ deployments. A single lower-cost database instance is fine for this
assignment.

The MySQL instance should have the following properties:

  * DB Engine Version = ~5.6 (most any recent release should work)
  * DB Class = db.t2.micro
  * Multi-AZ deployment: No
  * Allocated Storage: 10GB
  * DB Instance Identifier: wordpressdb
  * Master Username: wpdbadmin
  * Master Password: (choose a suitable password)
  * VPC: productionVPC
  * Subnet Group: Create new DB Subnet Group
  * Publicly Accessible: No
  * Availability Zone: No Preference
  * VPC Security Group: production-db
  * Database Name: wordpress

The MySQL database instance will take a few minutes to launch. Once the
instance is available, take a look at the instance properties and copy or
write down the database endpoint address. The address will look something
like this:

   wordpressdb.c4mwrq8d4std.us-east-1.rds.amazonaws.com

You will need to know this database endpoint address when setting up the WordPress web
application.

=== Create a load balancer

The auto scaling group will deploy multiple WordPress servers into your VPC.
You will need a load balancer to distribute the load across the servers and
to ensure that the service is highly available.

Go to the EC2 dashboard and select the `Load Balancers` menu item. Create a
new load balancer called `wordpress-lb` that will distribute HTTP (port 80) requests across
web servers located in both the us-west-1a and us-west-1b subnets. The load
balancer should use `/readme.html` as the health check ping path. You won't
be able to associate any EC2 instances with the load balancer yet. That's not
a problem since you can associate an instance with the load balancer later.

Note, make sure you select the correct VPC, subnet, and security group
settings for the load balancer. Review previous assignments if you are unsure
how to set these properties.

=== Create WordPress instance and AMI

The next step is to create a custom AMI containing a basic WordPress installation.
You will connect this installation to your MySQL database, and then store the
completed configuration as an AMI. You can use the new AMI to create an auto scaling
launch configuration.

Launch an EC2 instance with the following properties:

  * Amazon Linux AMI 64-bit
  * t2.micro
  * Network: productionVpc
  * Subnet: production-public-1
  * Auto-assign public IP: Enable
  * User data (in Advanced section):

  #!/bin/bash
  yum update -y
  yum install -y git httpd24 php56 php56-mysqlnd
  service httpd start
  chkconfig httpd on


  * Tag: Name = wordpress1
  * Security group: production-web

Once the instance is running, open a web browser on your desktop and browse
to the public IP address of the new instance. You should see a test page
appear in your browser. The user data script automatically updated the server
and installed a number of basic components needed by Wordpress, including
the Apache web server, PHP, and a MySQL library.

Connect to the new instance using a terminal program. Type in the following
command:

  $ wget https://wordpress.org/latest.tar.gz

The `wget` command is similar to the `curl` command we have used in previous
assignments. You can use the `wget` command to retrieve and download
data, whereas `curl` may be used to upload data as well.

Now that you have downloaded the latest version of the Wordpress software,
unpack the software archive:

  $ tar -xzf latest.tar.gz

You will notice that the unpacked archive is located in a new sub-directory
called `wordpress`. You need to configure the Wordpress software before
deploying it on the web server. Wordpress, like many software applications,
is configured using a text file containing settings and properties. Wordpress
comes with a sample configuration file. Start out by copying the sample
file to another file which you will use in production:

  $ cd wordpress
  $ cp wp-config-sample.php wp-config.php

Next, open the `wp-config.php` file in a text editor. You need to set the
MySQL database access information in the configuration file by modifying
6 lines.

First, modify the following line to include the `wordpress` database name:

  define('DB_NAME', 'database_name_here');

  define('DB_NAME', 'wordpress');

Second, modify the following line to include the `wpdbadmin` username:

  define('DB_USER', 'username_here');

  define('DB_USER', 'wpdbadmin');

Third, modify the following line to include the admin password:

  define('DB_PASSWORD', 'password_here');

  define('DB_PASSWORD', 'your-password');

Fourth, modify the following line to include your MySQL instance endpoint:

  define('DB_HOST', 'localhost');

  define('DB_HOST', 'wordpressdb.cqgfjsasiodi.us-west-1.rds.amazonaws.com');

Finally, add the following two lines to the configuration file right under
the line `define('DB_NAME', 'wordpress');`. You will need to enter the
DNS name for your load balancer.

  define('WP_HOME', 'http://(load balancer DNS name)');
  define('WP_SITEURL', 'http://(load balancer DNS name)');

.Example
----
define('DB_NAME', 'wordpress');
define('WP_HOME', 'http://wordpressLB-2127306763.us-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com');
define('WP_SITEURL', 'http://wordpressLB-2127306763.us-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com');
----

[WARNING]
====
Note, in a production WordPress configuration you would never use
the administrator username and password for your MySQL database. Instead you
would create a database access account specifically for the WordPress
application. In this case, we're just using the administrative account as
a shortcut. Don't rely on this as a best practice!
====

Next, you need to make a change to the web server configuration to improve
the security of the Wordpress application. The change will allow .htaccess
files to work properly.

Open the /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf file in an editor. Note, since this
file is outside your home directory you will need to use `sudo`. Find the
section of the file that starts with:

  <Directory "/var/www/html">

There are several lines that look similar to this section, so make sure you
are looking in the correct spot. Next, look for this setting:

  AllowOverride None

Change this existing setting to:

  AllowOverride All

Close and save the configuration file.

You also need to make some changes to the file access permissions on the
Wordpress directory because the application needs to be able to update local
files. Enter the following commands:

  $ sudo groupadd www
  $ sudo usermod -a -G www apache
  $ sudo chown -R apache:www /var/www
  $ sudo chmod 2775 /var/www
  $ find /var/www -type d -exec sudo chmod 2775 {} \;
  $ find /var/www -type f -exec sudo chmod 0664 {} \;

Finally, restart the Apache web server so that it picks up the new server
configuration changes:

  $ sudo service httpd restart

The WordPress site is available but it is configured to use your load
balancer. Therefore, you need to associate the instance with the load
balancer. Go to the `instances` property of your load balancer and
*edit* the instances to add the `wordpress1` server.

Open up a web browser on your desktop and type in the DNS name of the load
balancer as the URL. You should see a Wordpress installation page.
Congratulations! If you don't see the installation page, check to make sure
that the instance status in the load balancer properties is set to _InService_.

The next step of the process is to configure the Wordpress website settings.
Type in the following properties:

  * Site Title: My WordPress Site (or use anything you like, be creative!)
  * Username: wpadmin
  * Password: (make up a password)
  * Email: (your email address)

Then click the install button to install the Wordpress website. Once the
site is installed, you can enter your admin username and password to access
the WordPress administrative console. Open up a new tab on your web browser
and type in the public IP address of your EC2 instance. You should see the
default WordPress page. You now have a fully functioning WordPress application
running on EC2 connected to a database managed by RDS.

You can shutdown the EC2 instance now that you have confirmed that the
WordPress application is running properly. Make sure you shutdown the instance,
not terminate it! Stopping the instance will allow the data on the server to
quiesce. After the instance stops, create an image based on the instance
called `wordpressweb`. AWS will take a few minutes to build the new AMI.

Go back to the load balancer properties and remove the instance from the
load balancer.

=== Create an Auto Scaling group

The next step in the assignment is to create a launch configuration and auto
scaling group. Select the `Launch Configuration` menu item and click on the
button to create a new auto scaling group. Here are the properties for the
new launch configuration:

  * AMI: wordpressweb (located in your personal AMI listing)
  * Type: t2.micro
  * Launch configuration name: wordpress-launch-config
  * IP Address Type: Assign a public IP address to every instance.  (located in advanced section)
  * Security group: production-web

The auto scaling group should have the following properties:

  * Group name: wordpress-web-group
  * Group size: 2
  * Network: productionVpc
  * Subnets: production-public-1 & production-public-2
  * Receive traffic from Elastic Load Balancers: Enabled
    ** Select the `wordpress-lb` load balancer
    ** Health check type: ELB
  * Scaling policy: Keep this group at its initial size
  * Tag:
    ** Key = Group
    ** Value = wordpressweb

Take a look at the Activity History of the auto scaling group you just launched.
You should see a couple pending activities. If you see any failure messages,
that means either the launch configuration settings or the auto scaling group
settings are incorrect. You may need to delete the new launch configuration and
scaling group to build the configuration again.

If the auto scaling process is working properly you should see two new instanced
being launched in the EC2 dashboard. Once the instances are running, locate
the DNS name of your load balancer. It should look something like:

  wordpressLB-2127306763.us-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com

Type the load balancer DNS name into your web browser. You should see the
Hello World page from your WordPress site. Hit the refresh button on your
browser a few times so that the load balancer redirects the request to a different
server. Now you have a highly available WordPress site that is being managed
by an auto scaling group.

=== Simulate an auto scaling failure

Auto scaling is designed to respond to events such as a failed instance or the
CPU load on an instance increasing above a certain threshold. Let's simulate an
instance failure by terminating one of the running instances. It doesn't matter
which instance you choose.

After terminating one of the running instances, wait a few minutes and check
out the list of EC2 instances on the dashboard. You should see a new new instance
starting up. Auto scaling will automatically maintain two running instances at
all times.

[NOTE]
.Important Production Note
====
Your WordPress application probably looks like it is working correctly. The load
balancer is distributing requests between the two web servers. You can see the
WordPress site if you browser to the load balancer address and refresh the
page multiple times. So everything is working, right? Not exactly. The current
architecture has a problem -- a big one.

If a user creates a new WordPress post and uploads an image,
that image file will get stored on the local filesystem of the server the user is
was connected to. When another user visits the site and views the
previous user's post, the new user may or *may not* see the image! That's
because the image is only stored on one of the two web servers.

The solution to this problem is that all uploaded content needs to be stored
in a file location that is shared by both web servers. Traditionally, people
solved this problem by storing the uploaded files in an S3 bucket or setting
up a replicated file share between the web servers. Perhaps EFS is the best
way to solve this issue for new implementations.
====

=== Collecting session data

Connect to one of the running instances using a terminal program. In assignment
4, you used the AWS command line interface to interact with S3. Let's use the
same CLI to pull some event information from the EC2 auto scaling service.

First you need to configure the AWS CLI using your credentials. You didn't have
to do this in the previous assignment with S3 because you associated an
IAM Role with the instance. Type in the following command:

  $ aws configure

The CLI will prompt you for your account credentials. Hopefully you have these
written down from assignment 2! If you forgot your access key, you can look at
your account properties in the IAM dashboard. However, your secret key cannot
be recovered. You would need to generate a new secret key for your access account
if you lost the previous key. Don't lose this key!

The default region name for the AWS CLI configuration is: `us-west-1` and just
select the default output format (none).

Next, type in the following command to view all the autoscaling activities:

  $ aws autoscaling describe-scaling-activities --auto-scaling-group-name wordpress-web-group

You should see a long text output including a list of activities with each
having a Description, ActivityId, StartTime, etc.

Next, create a sub-directory in your home directory called `assignment6` and
change to this new directory. Initialize a new Git repository in the directory.

Create a small batch script called `getdata.sh` which performs the following:

  * Copies the output of the following command into a text file in the current
  directory called `activity.json`:

  aws autoscaling describe-scaling-activities --auto-scaling-group-name wordpress-web-group

  * Copies the /var/www/html/wp-config.php file to the current directory into
  a file with the same name.

  * Copies the /var/log/httpd/access_log file to the current directory into
  a file with the same name

Note, you may need to use `sudo` to copy the `wp-config.php` and `access_log`
files.

After running the script, you should have four files in the current directory:

  access_log  activity.json  getdata.sh  wp-config.php

Check each of the files to make sure the files contain data. Add all of the
files to the Git repository and commit your work.

Finally, create a new GitHub repository called `infrastructure-assignment6`
and associate your local repository with this new GitHub repo. Push the
local master branch from your repository up to GitHub. Verify that your
files are properly stored on Github.

=== Terminate server

The last step in the assignment is to delete the auto scaling group, launch
configuration, EC2 instances, EC2 load balancer, AMI, EC2 snapshots, RDS database, and VPC. I'll leave
this as an exercise for you to figure out how to complete. When deleting the
RDS database instance, you don't need to save a copy of the database as a
snapshot.

Remember, you will
get billed for each hour these services are running (or at least lose free
credits). You launched quite a few services this week, so if you don't terminate
them you will have a nice bill waiting for you at the end of the month!

== Submitting your assignment
I will review your published work on GitHub after the homework due date.

Commit message:

update all assignments with github classroom links

assignment-6.adoc, after:

:doctype: article
:blank: pass:[ +]

:sectnums!:

= SEIS 665 Assignment 6: Autoscaling
Jason Baker <bake2352@stthomas.edu>
1.0, 4/8/2016

== Overview
This week we will enable auto scaling for a WordPress web application. The web
application will communicate with a backend database server running on RDS.

Like the previous assignment, you will have to work through some of the detailed
steps to complete the requirements. If you get stuck on a step, do a little
research on the AWS documentation site or reach out to the class on Slack.

== Requirements

You need to have a personal AWS account and GitHub account for this assignment.

== The assignment

Let's start scaling.

=== Create VPC and subnets

Each assignment in this course has been less prescriptive than the previous
and this assignment is no different. By now, you should understand how to configure
a VPC, subnets, routing tables, an internet gateway, an elastic load balancer, and
EC2 instances. You will create all of these components and more in this week's
assignment. Remember, you can always look back at previous assignments, class
recordings, or online AWS documentation if you get stuck on a step.

You will build a VPC and set of AWS services which conforms to the service
diagram below.
image:images/assignment6/diagram.png["600","600"]

Start the assignment by creating a VPC named `productionVpc` in the `us-west`
region with a CIDR block of `10.0.0.0/16`. The VPC will have two subnets:

  * `production-public-1` subnet located in the `us-west-1a` availability zone
  will use the `10.0.1.0/25` network.
  * `production-public-2` subnet located in the `us-west-1b` availability zone
  will use the `10.0.1.128/25` network.

All instances on the two production subnets will need to be able to communicate with
the Internet. You will need to configure the VPC to allow this communication.

=== Create Security Groups

While you are in the VPC dashboard, go ahead and create a couple security
groups. You will need to use these security groups when launching services
later in the assignment. It's always a good idea to plan out the security
requirements for your services in advance.

Create two security groups called `production-web` and `production-db`. The
first security group will allow all external devices to communicate with
the web server instances via SSH and HTTP. Here are the requirements for the
first security group:

  * production-web
    ** Name tag: production-web
    ** Group name: production-web
    ** Description: production web servers
    ** VPC: productionVPC
    ** Inbound:
      *** SSH from source 0.0.0.0/0
      *** HTTP from source 0.0.0.0/0

The second security group will allow only the web serves to communicate with
the MySQL database instances using port 3306. Here are the requirements for the
second security group:

  * production-db
    ** Name tag: production-db
    ** Group name: production-db
    ** Description: production database servers
    ** VPC: productionVPC
    ** Inbound:
      *** MySQL (3306) from source production-web security group


=== Create RDS database

Wordpress is a very popular Content Management System (CMS) and like most CMS
systems it requires a database to persist content and user account information.
We will use a MySQL database managed by the RDS service to support this
database requirement.

Go to the RDS dashboard on AWS and launch a new MySQL database instance. The
launch wizard may ask you if you plan to use the instance for production or
development purposes. In this case, select the development option. In a real
production scenario you would want to use a database tier that supports
multi-AZ deployments. A single lower-cost database instance is fine for this
assignment.

The MySQL instance should have the following properties:

  * DB Engine Version = ~5.6 (most any recent release should work)
  * DB Class = db.t2.micro
  * Multi-AZ deployment: No
  * Allocated Storage: 10GB
  * DB Instance Identifier: wordpressdb
  * Master Username: wpdbadmin
  * Master Password: (choose a suitable password)
  * VPC: productionVPC
  * Subnet Group: Create new DB Subnet Group
  * Publicly Accessible: No
  * Availability Zone: No Preference
  * VPC Security Group: production-db
  * Database Name: wordpress

The MySQL database instance will take a few minutes to launch. Once the
instance is available, take a look at the instance properties and copy or
write down the database endpoint address. The address will look something
like this:

   wordpressdb.c4mwrq8d4std.us-east-1.rds.amazonaws.com

You will need to know this database endpoint address when setting up the WordPress web
application.

=== Create a load balancer

The auto scaling group will deploy multiple WordPress servers into your VPC.
You will need a load balancer to distribute the load across the servers and
to ensure that the service is highly available.

Go to the EC2 dashboard and select the `Load Balancers` menu item. Create a
new load balancer called `wordpress-lb` that will distribute HTTP (port 80) requests across
web servers located in both the us-west-1a and us-west-1b subnets. The load
balancer should use `/readme.html` as the health check ping path. You won't
be able to associate any EC2 instances with the load balancer yet. That's not
a problem since you can associate an instance with the load balancer later.

Note, make sure you select the correct VPC, subnet, and security group
settings for the load balancer. Review previous assignments if you are unsure
how to set these properties.

=== Create WordPress instance and AMI

The next step is to create a custom AMI containing a basic WordPress installation.
You will connect this installation to your MySQL database, and then store the
completed configuration as an AMI. You can use the new AMI to create an auto scaling
launch configuration.

Launch an EC2 instance with the following properties:

  * Amazon Linux AMI 64-bit
  * t2.micro
  * Network: productionVpc
  * Subnet: production-public-1
  * Auto-assign public IP: Enable
  * User data (in Advanced section):

  #!/bin/bash
  yum update -y
  yum install -y git httpd24 php56 php56-mysqlnd
  service httpd start
  chkconfig httpd on


  * Tag: Name = wordpress1
  * Security group: production-web

Once the instance is running, open a web browser on your desktop and browse
to the public IP address of the new instance. You should see a test page
appear in your browser. The user data script automatically updated the server
and installed a number of basic components needed by Wordpress, including
the Apache web server, PHP, and a MySQL library.

Connect to the new instance using a terminal program. Type in the following
command:

  $ wget https://wordpress.org/latest.tar.gz

The `wget` command is similar to the `curl` command we have used in previous
assignments. You can use the `wget` command to retrieve and download
data, whereas `curl` may be used to upload data as well.

Now that you have downloaded the latest version of the Wordpress software,
unpack the software archive:

  $ tar -xzf latest.tar.gz

You will notice that the unpacked archive is located in a new sub-directory
called `wordpress`. You need to configure the Wordpress software before
deploying it on the web server. Wordpress, like many software applications,
is configured using a text file containing settings and properties. Wordpress
comes with a sample configuration file. Start out by copying the sample
file to another file which you will use in production:

  $ cd wordpress
  $ cp wp-config-sample.php wp-config.php

Next, open the `wp-config.php` file in a text editor. You need to set the
MySQL database access information in the configuration file by modifying
6 lines.

First, modify the following line to include the `wordpress` database name:

  define('DB_NAME', 'database_name_here');

  define('DB_NAME', 'wordpress');

Second, modify the following line to include the `wpdbadmin` username:

  define('DB_USER', 'username_here');

  define('DB_USER', 'wpdbadmin');

Third, modify the following line to include the admin password:

  define('DB_PASSWORD', 'password_here');

  define('DB_PASSWORD', 'your-password');

Fourth, modify the following line to include your MySQL instance endpoint:

  define('DB_HOST', 'localhost');

  define('DB_HOST', 'wordpressdb.cqgfjsasiodi.us-west-1.rds.amazonaws.com');

Finally, add the following two lines to the configuration file right under
the line `define('DB_NAME', 'wordpress');`. You will need to enter the
DNS name for your load balancer.

  define('WP_HOME', 'http://(load balancer DNS name)');
  define('WP_SITEURL', 'http://(load balancer DNS name)');

.Example
----
define('DB_NAME', 'wordpress');
define('WP_HOME', 'http://wordpressLB-2127306763.us-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com');
define('WP_SITEURL', 'http://wordpressLB-2127306763.us-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com');
----

[WARNING]
====
Note, in a production WordPress configuration you would never use
the administrator username and password for your MySQL database. Instead you
would create a database access account specifically for the WordPress
application. In this case, we're just using the administrative account as
a shortcut. Don't rely on this as a best practice!
====

Next, you need to make a change to the web server configuration to improve
the security of the Wordpress application. The change will allow .htaccess
files to work properly.

Open the /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf file in an editor. Note, since this
file is outside your home directory you will need to use `sudo`. Find the
section of the file that starts with:

  <Directory "/var/www/html">

There are several lines that look similar to this section, so make sure you
are looking in the correct spot. Next, look for this setting:

  AllowOverride None

Change this existing setting to:

  AllowOverride All

Close and save the configuration file.

You also need to make some changes to the file access permissions on the
Wordpress directory because the application needs to be able to update local
files. Enter the following commands:

  $ sudo groupadd www
  $ sudo usermod -a -G www apache
  $ sudo chown -R apache:www /var/www
  $ sudo chmod 2775 /var/www
  $ find /var/www -type d -exec sudo chmod 2775 {} \;
  $ find /var/www -type f -exec sudo chmod 0664 {} \;

Finally, restart the Apache web server so that it picks up the new server
configuration changes:

  $ sudo service httpd restart

The WordPress site is available but it is configured to use your load
balancer. Therefore, you need to associate the instance with the load
balancer. Go to the `instances` property of your load balancer and
*edit* the instances to add the `wordpress1` server.

Open up a web browser on your desktop and type in the DNS name of the load
balancer as the URL. You should see a Wordpress installation page.
Congratulations! If you don't see the installation page, check to make sure
that the instance status in the load balancer properties is set to _InService_.

The next step of the process is to configure the Wordpress website settings.
Type in the following properties:

  * Site Title: My WordPress Site (or use anything you like, be creative!)
  * Username: wpadmin
  * Password: (make up a password)
  * Email: (your email address)

Then click the install button to install the Wordpress website. Once the
site is installed, you can enter your admin username and password to access
the WordPress administrative console. Open up a new tab on your web browser
and type in the public IP address of your EC2 instance. You should see the
default WordPress page. You now have a fully functioning WordPress application
running on EC2 connected to a database managed by RDS.

You can shutdown the EC2 instance now that you have confirmed that the
WordPress application is running properly. Make sure you shutdown the instance,
not terminate it! Stopping the instance will allow the data on the server to
quiesce. After the instance stops, create an image based on the instance
called `wordpressweb`. AWS will take a few minutes to build the new AMI.

Go back to the load balancer properties and remove the instance from the
load balancer.

=== Create an Auto Scaling group

The next step in the assignment is to create a launch configuration and auto
scaling group. Select the `Launch Configuration` menu item and click on the
button to create a new auto scaling group. Here are the properties for the
new launch configuration:

  * AMI: wordpressweb (located in your personal AMI listing)
  * Type: t2.micro
  * Launch configuration name: wordpress-launch-config
  * IP Address Type: Assign a public IP address to every instance.  (located in advanced section)
  * Security group: production-web

The auto scaling group should have the following properties:

  * Group name: wordpress-web-group
  * Group size: 2
  * Network: productionVpc
  * Subnets: production-public-1 & production-public-2
  * Receive traffic from Elastic Load Balancers: Enabled
    ** Select the `wordpress-lb` load balancer
    ** Health check type: ELB
  * Scaling policy: Keep this group at its initial size
  * Tag:
    ** Key = Group
    ** Value = wordpressweb

Take a look at the Activity History of the auto scaling group you just launched.
You should see a couple pending activities. If you see any failure messages,
that means either the launch configuration settings or the auto scaling group
settings are incorrect. You may need to delete the new launch configuration and
scaling group to build the configuration again.

If the auto scaling process is working properly you should see two new instanced
being launched in the EC2 dashboard. Once the instances are running, locate
the DNS name of your load balancer. It should look something like:

  wordpressLB-2127306763.us-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com

Type the load balancer DNS name into your web browser. You should see the
Hello World page from your WordPress site. Hit the refresh button on your
browser a few times so that the load balancer redirects the request to a different
server. Now you have a highly available WordPress site that is being managed
by an auto scaling group.

=== Simulate an auto scaling failure

Auto scaling is designed to respond to events such as a failed instance or the
CPU load on an instance increasing above a certain threshold. Let's simulate an
instance failure by terminating one of the running instances. It doesn't matter
which instance you choose.

After terminating one of the running instances, wait a few minutes and check
out the list of EC2 instances on the dashboard. You should see a new new instance
starting up. Auto scaling will automatically maintain two running instances at
all times.

[NOTE]
.Important Production Note
====
Your WordPress application probably looks like it is working correctly. The load
balancer is distributing requests between the two web servers. You can see the
WordPress site if you browser to the load balancer address and refresh the
page multiple times. So everything is working, right? Not exactly. The current
architecture has a problem -- a big one.

If a user creates a new WordPress post and uploads an image,
that image file will get stored on the local filesystem of the server the user is
was connected to. When another user visits the site and views the
previous user's post, the new user may or *may not* see the image! That's
because the image is only stored on one of the two web servers.

The solution to this problem is that all uploaded content needs to be stored
in a file location that is shared by both web servers. Traditionally, people
solved this problem by storing the uploaded files in an S3 bucket or setting
up a replicated file share between the web servers. Perhaps EFS is the best
way to solve this issue for new implementations.
====

=== Collecting session data

Connect to one of the running instances using a terminal program. In assignment
4, you used the AWS command line interface to interact with S3. Let's use the
same CLI to pull some event information from the EC2 auto scaling service.

First you need to configure the AWS CLI using your credentials. You didn't have
to do this in the previous assignment with S3 because you associated an
IAM Role with the instance. Type in the following command:

  $ aws configure

The CLI will prompt you for your account credentials. Hopefully you have these
written down from assignment 2! If you forgot your access key, you can look at
your account properties in the IAM dashboard. However, your secret key cannot
be recovered. You would need to generate a new secret key for your access account
if you lost the previous key. Don't lose this key!

The default region name for the AWS CLI configuration is: `us-west-1` and just
select the default output format (none).

Next, type in the following command to view all the autoscaling activities:

  $ aws autoscaling describe-scaling-activities --auto-scaling-group-name wordpress-web-group

You should see a long text output including a list of activities with each
having a Description, ActivityId, StartTime, etc.

Next, create a sub-directory in your home directory called `assignment-6-autoscaling-<username>` (where <username> is your GitHub account name) and
change to this new directory. Initialize a new Git repository in the directory.

Create a small batch script called `getdata.sh` which performs the following:

  * Copies the output of the following command into a text file in the current
  directory called `activity.json`:

  aws autoscaling describe-scaling-activities --auto-scaling-group-name wordpress-web-group

  * Copies the /var/www/html/wp-config.php file to the current directory into
  a file with the same name.

  * Copies the /var/log/httpd/access_log file to the current directory into
  a file with the same name

Note, you may need to use `sudo` to copy the `wp-config.php` and `access_log`
files.

After running the script, you should have four files in the current directory:

  access_log  activity.json  getdata.sh  wp-config.php

Check each of the files to make sure the files contain data. Add all of the
files to the Git repository and commit your work.

Finally, create a new GitHub Classroom repository by clicking on this link: https://classroom.github.com/assignment-invitations/27135615bd2442d325b1d44fc3cbc568

Associate your local repository with this new GitHub repo and push the local master branch from your repository up to GitHub. Verify that your
files are properly stored on Github.

=== Terminate server

The last step in the assignment is to delete the auto scaling group, launch
configuration, EC2 instances, EC2 load balancer, AMI, EC2 snapshots, RDS database, and VPC. I'll leave
this as an exercise for you to figure out how to complete. When deleting the
RDS database instance, you don't need to save a copy of the database as a
snapshot.

Remember, you will
get billed for each hour these services are running (or at least lose free
credits). You launched quite a few services this week, so if you don't terminate
them you will have a nice bill waiting for you at the end of the month!

== Submitting your assignment
I will review your published work on GitHub after the homework due date.
