assignment-8.adoc, before:

:doctype: article
:blank: pass:[ +]

:sectnums!:

= DevOps & Cloud Infrastructure: Assignment 8
Jason Baker <bake2352@stthomas.edu>
1.0, 8/14/2016

== Overview
We discussed how IT professionals now design and provision infrastructure using
code -- a concept known as Infrastructure as Code. The AWS CloudFormation
service allows you to define cloud infrastructure using JSON template files.
These template files create resource stacks in AWS.

In this week's assignment, you will use AWS CloudFormation to create a relatively
basic stack. Your stack will expand the stack design that was created during
the hands-on portion of the class. The easiest way to create your stack is by using
the CloudFormation Designer tool.

You will learn how code can simplify and ensure the repeatability of infrastructure
deployments.

== Requirements

You need to have a personal AWS account and GitHub account for this assignment.

== The assignment

Your first stack awaits! Let's go.

=== Download WordPress application

This week's assignment isn't as prescriptive as some of the previous assignments.
You will likely need to experiment with the CloudFormation Designer and template
code a bit to build the required solution. You can review the class powerpoint
presentation, AWS CloudFormation documentation, and YouTube resources if you
need to figure out how to configure a resource. Remember, this stack is similar
in many ways to the stack that was built in class.

Here's the story. The engineering manager at your office came to you and asked
if you could build a new stack for the development team. The stack must have
two Amazon Linux EC2 instances located behind an Elastic Load Balancer. The
load balancer must handle incoming requests on port 80 and send those to the
EC2 instances on port 80.Additionally, the two instances need to be members of a security group which
allows incoming traffic on ports 22, 80, and 443.

The engineering manager would like to be able to provide two input parameters to
define the availability zones for each of the EC2 instances. Also, he would like
the stack to output the load balancer dns name.

  * Create a new stack called *Webservers-dev*.
  * Create two EC2 instances named *web1* and *web2*.
    ** Instance type: *t2.micro*.
    ** Use this AMI image: ami-3ea13f29
    ** Create the instances using your key pair.

  * Create a security group named *Webservers-SG*.
    ** Allow incoming requests on port 22 from 0.0.0.0/0
    ** Allow incoming requests on port 80 from 0.0.0.0/0
    ** Allow incoming requests on port 443 from 0.0.0.0/0
  * Create a load balanced named *Application1-LB*
    ** Load balance incoming requests on port 80 and send to instance port 80 using the http protocol.
    ** Load balancer health check via http on port 80 to the "/" url location.

=== Launch the stack

Once you have created and validated your template, save it to your local file
system. Next, launch your new stack and watch AWS CloudFormation go through the
build steps. It will take a few minutes for CloudFormation to build the stack
resources.

When you see that the EC2 instances are running, go ahead and terminal into
one of the instances to confirm that you can access the server. Next, look at
the output value from the CloudFormation stack to determine the DNS address
for the load balancer that was created. Enter this DNS address into your
web browser to confirm that it is distributing requests across the instances
properly.

=== Update the stack

Now that you are confident that the stack is running properly, go back to the
CloudFormation dashboard to update the stack. Select the stack and choose the
option to update the stack.

In the stack update wizard, select two new availability zones for the stack
EC2 instances. Launch the updated configuration and watch as CloudFormation
replaces the instances.

=== Save your work

Create a new GitHub repository called `infrastructure-assignment8` and commit
your stack template file to this repository. You could create a new Git
repository on your local machine, commit the template file to it, and then
push the local repository up to GitHub. Or, you could use the GitHub web
console to create a new repository and upload your template file to it. The
latter method is probably a little quicker for this assignment.

=== Terminate application environment

The last step in the assignment is to delete all the AWS services you created.
Go to the CloudFormation dashboard, select your running stack, and choose the
delete option. Watch as CloudFormation deletes all the resources previously
created.

== Submitting your assignment
I will review your published work on GitHub after the homework due date.

Commit message:

update all assignments with github classroom links

assignment-8.adoc, after:

:doctype: article
:blank: pass:[ +]

:sectnums!:

= SEIS 665 Assignment 8: CloudFormation
Jason Baker <bake2352@stthomas.edu>
1.0, 8/14/2016

== Overview
We discussed how IT professionals now design and provision infrastructure using
code -- a concept known as Infrastructure as Code. The AWS CloudFormation
service allows you to define cloud infrastructure using JSON template files.
These template files create resource stacks in AWS.

In this week's assignment, you will use AWS CloudFormation to create a relatively
basic stack. Your stack will expand the stack design that was created during
the hands-on portion of the class. The easiest way to create your stack is by using
the CloudFormation Designer tool.

You will learn how code can simplify and ensure the repeatability of infrastructure
deployments.

== Requirements

You need to have a personal AWS account and GitHub account for this assignment.

== The assignment

Your first stack awaits! Let's go.

=== Download WordPress application

This week's assignment isn't as prescriptive as some of the previous assignments.
You will likely need to experiment with the CloudFormation Designer and template
code a bit to build the required solution. You can review the class powerpoint
presentation, AWS CloudFormation documentation, and YouTube resources if you
need to figure out how to configure a resource. Remember, this stack is similar
in many ways to the stack that was built in class.

Here's the story. The engineering manager at your office came to you and asked
if you could build a new stack for the development team. The stack must have
two Amazon Linux EC2 instances located behind an Elastic Load Balancer. The
load balancer must handle incoming requests on port 80 and send those to the
EC2 instances on port 80.Additionally, the two instances need to be members of a security group which
allows incoming traffic on ports 22, 80, and 443.

The engineering manager would like to be able to provide two input parameters to
define the availability zones for each of the EC2 instances. Also, he would like
the stack to output the load balancer dns name.

  * Create a new stack called *Webservers-dev*.
  * Create two EC2 instances named *web1* and *web2*.
    ** Instance type: *t2.micro*.
    ** Use this AMI image: ami-3ea13f29
    ** Create the instances using your key pair.

  * Create a security group named *Webservers-SG*.
    ** Allow incoming requests on port 22 from 0.0.0.0/0
    ** Allow incoming requests on port 80 from 0.0.0.0/0
    ** Allow incoming requests on port 443 from 0.0.0.0/0
  * Create a load balanced named *Application1-LB*
    ** Load balance incoming requests on port 80 and send to instance port 80 using the http protocol.
    ** Load balancer health check via http on port 80 to the "/" url location.

=== Launch the stack

Once you have created and validated your template, save it to your local file
system. Next, launch your new stack and watch AWS CloudFormation go through the
build steps. It will take a few minutes for CloudFormation to build the stack
resources.

When you see that the EC2 instances are running, go ahead and terminal into
one of the instances to confirm that you can access the server. Next, look at
the output value from the CloudFormation stack to determine the DNS address
for the load balancer that was created. Enter this DNS address into your
web browser to confirm that it is distributing requests across the instances
properly.

=== Update the stack

Now that you are confident that the stack is running properly, go back to the
CloudFormation dashboard to update the stack. Select the stack and choose the
option to update the stack.

In the stack update wizard, select two new availability zones for the stack
EC2 instances. Launch the updated configuration and watch as CloudFormation
replaces the instances.

=== Save your work

Create a new GitHub Classroom repository by clicking on this link: https://classroom.github.com/assignment-invitations/4bb37342c50150f66bef6b83443c44fc

Commit your stack template file to this repository. You could create a new Git repository on your local machine, commit the template file to it, and then push the local repository up to GitHub. Or, you could use the GitHub web console to create a new repository and upload your template file to it. The
latter method is probably a little quicker for this assignment.

=== Terminate application environment

The last step in the assignment is to delete all the AWS services you created.
Go to the CloudFormation dashboard, select your running stack, and choose the
delete option. Watch as CloudFormation deletes all the resources previously
created.

== Submitting your assignment
I will review your published work on GitHub after the homework due date.
