assignments/assignment-11.adoc, before:

:doctype: article
:blank: pass:[ +]

:sectnums!:

= SEIS 665 Assignment 11: Docker
Jason Baker <bake2352@stthomas.edu>
1.3, 4/24/2018

== Overview
Containers are revolutionizing the way we package and deploy applications. Traditionally, we would install applications on bare metal hardware or virtual machines in our computing environment. We would have to carefully place applications on infrastructure to minimize conflicting requirements such as different versions of shared libraries. Containers let us partition applications and related dependencies on a shared computing platform.

In this week's assignment, you will build a Docker container using a Dockerfile and a CI/CD infrastructure pipeline.

== Requirements

You need to have a personal AWS account and GitHub account for this assignment.

== The assignment

Let's start shipping those containers!

=== Build Image Pipeline

It is a common practice to automate the building of Docker images using a CI/CD pipeline. 
Launch a Jenkins stack in the us-east-1 region using the following template:

  https://s3.amazonaws.com/seis665/jenkins-cf.json

Create a new GitHub Classroom repository by clicking on this link: https://classroom.github.com/assignment-invitations/eeea11fb5604fd931c30393c935aba6b

Create a new Jenkins pipeline job called `docker-pipeline` and configure it to use a Jenkinsfile located in your
Classroom repository. Note that since you are using a private repository for this assignment, you will need to enter
GitHub credentials for the git configuration in the pipeline job. Also, you will need to
reference these credentials in the git command used by your Jenkinsfile. This is pretty easy to
setup.

Please follow these steps to setup your GitHub access credentials in the pipeline job:

    * Create a GitHub personal access token (or use an existing token) in your personal GitHub account by going
    to the Settings->Developer Settings->Personal access tokens section on the GitHub site. Store this token 
    somewhere safe because you will need to enter it into the Jenkins configuration shortly. The token you create 
    should have the following scopes enabled:
        ** repo
        ** admin:repo_hook
    * When you are configuring the git settings for your pipeline job, click on the `Add` button by 
the credentials and select the `Jenkins` credential provider. 
    * Create a new `Username with password` credential, typing in your GitHub username and using the 
    personal access token as the password. 
    * Enter an identifiable value into the description field like `github account`. 
    * Click the `Add` button to add your GitHub credential.
    * Select your newly created credential in the `Credentials` drop-down field. If your credential works 
    properly for your private repo, you should not see a Jenkins login error message.
    * Note, you do not need to setup a pipeline build trigger or GitHub webhook for this assignment.

The pipeline job will use these credentials to access your private GitHub repository and retrieve a
Jenkinsfile. One of the first things the Jenkinsfile should do is tell Jenkins to clone the repository
using the `git` command. Let's use the `Pipeline Syntax` link at the bottom of the pipeline configuration
page to generate the proper syntax for this command.

    * Click on the `Pipeline Syntax` link at the bottom of the pipeline configuration page and select 
    the `git: Git` sample step. 
    * Type in your git repository URL (ending with `.git`).
    * Select the credentials you created earlier from the credentials drop-down field. If you select the 
    correct credentials, you should not see a Jenkins login error message.
    * Click the `Generate Pipeline Script` button. 
    * Copy-and-paste the generated code into your Jenkinsfile.

.Example:
----
git credentialsId: 'c868a19a-3de9-4ae1-9538-b832fd1c8b12', url: 'https://github.com/seis665/assignment-11-jasondbaker.git'
----

Your Jenkinsfile will have three stages: `Setup`, `Build` and `Test`. The `Setup` stage will clone a copy of the assignment GitHub repository (using the git code snippet above). It will also copy a webpage file from an S3 bucket into the project workspace. The `Build` stage will use a Dockerfile to build a new Docker image. Finally, the `Test` stage will create a new Docker container using the Docker image and test it to see if it is working properly.

Let's look at the requirements for each of these stages.

=== The Setup stage

Create an HTML file called `classweb.html` with the following contents:

    <html>
    <body>
      <h1>My class webserver</h1>
    </body>
    </html>

Store this file in an S3 bucket in the us-east-1 region. The `Setup` stage of the pipeline will copy the `classweb.html` file from the S3 bucket into a file called `index.html` in the workspace.

=== The Build Stage

The `Build` stage will use a Dockerfile to create a new container image called `classweb` with a tag of `1.0`. Here are the configuration requirements for the Docker image:

  * The new image must be based off the `nginx` image.
  * Set the maintainer of the image to your name and email address.
  * The image should expose port 80.
  * Copy the `index.html` which was downloaded from S3 to the /usr/share/nginx/html directory in the container.

=== The Test Stage

The `Test` stage will validate that the Docker image was created properly. The pipeline should create a new container called `classweb1` using the image built in the previous stage. The container should have the following configuration settings:

  * The container should run in a detached (daemon) mode.
  * The container should map port 80 within the container to port 80 on the host server.
  * The container should have an environment variable mapping the key `NGINX_PORT` to the value `80`.

After launching the container, the pipeline should test the container using the curl command:

  curl localhost

Finally, once the test completes the pipeline should stop and delete the container.

=== Console Output

Once you have the pipeline working properly, copy the console output from the last 
successful build into a file called `console.txt` and check it into the GitHub repository.

=== Check your work

Here is what the contents of your git repository should look like before final submission:

====
&#x2523; Dockerfile +
&#x2523; Jenkinsfile +
&#x2517; console.txt +

====


=== Terminate application environment

The last step in the assignment is to terminate your CloudFormation stack on AWS.

== Submitting your assignment
I will review your published work on GitHub after the homework due date.

Commit message:

update jenkins node with curl

assignments/assignment-11.adoc, after:

:doctype: article
:blank: pass:[ +]

:sectnums!:

= SEIS 665 Assignment 11: Docker
Jason Baker <bake2352@stthomas.edu>
1.3, 4/24/2018

== Overview
Containers are revolutionizing the way we package and deploy applications. Traditionally, we would install applications on bare metal hardware or virtual machines in our computing environment. We would have to carefully place applications on infrastructure to minimize conflicting requirements such as different versions of shared libraries. Containers let us partition applications and related dependencies on a shared computing platform.

In this week's assignment, you will build a Docker container using a Dockerfile and a CI/CD infrastructure pipeline.

== Requirements

You need to have a personal AWS account and GitHub account for this assignment.

== The assignment

Let's start shipping those containers!

=== Build Image Pipeline

It is a common practice to automate the building of Docker images using a CI/CD pipeline. 
Launch a Jenkins stack in the us-east-1 region using the following template:

  https://s3.amazonaws.com/seis665/jenkins-cf.json

Create a new GitHub Classroom repository by clicking on this link: https://classroom.github.com/assignment-invitations/eeea11fb5604fd931c30393c935aba6b

Create a new Jenkins pipeline job called `docker-pipeline` and configure it to use a Jenkinsfile located in your
Classroom repository. Note that since you are using a private repository for this assignment, you will need to enter
GitHub credentials for the git configuration in the pipeline job. Also, you will need to
reference these credentials in the git command used by your Jenkinsfile. This is pretty easy to
setup.

Please follow these steps to setup your GitHub access credentials in the pipeline job:

    * Create a GitHub personal access token (or use an existing token) in your personal GitHub account by going
    to the Settings->Developer Settings->Personal access tokens section on the GitHub site. Store this token 
    somewhere safe because you will need to enter it into the Jenkins configuration shortly. The token you create 
    should have the following scopes enabled:
        ** repo
        ** admin:repo_hook
    * When you are configuring the git settings for your pipeline job, click on the `Add` button by 
the credentials and select the `Jenkins` credential provider. 
    * Create a new `Username with password` credential, typing in your GitHub username and using the 
    personal access token as the password. 
    * Enter an identifiable value into the description field like `github account`. 
    * Click the `Add` button to add your GitHub credential.
    * Select your newly created credential in the `Credentials` drop-down field. If your credential works 
    properly for your private repo, you should not see a Jenkins login error message.
    * Note, you do not need to setup a pipeline build trigger or GitHub webhook for this assignment.

The pipeline job will use these credentials to access your private GitHub repository and retrieve a
Jenkinsfile. One of the first things the Jenkinsfile should do is tell Jenkins to clone the repository
using the `git` command. Let's use the `Pipeline Syntax` link at the bottom of the pipeline configuration
page to generate the proper syntax for this command.

    * Click on the `Pipeline Syntax` link at the bottom of the pipeline configuration page and select 
    the `git: Git` sample step. 
    * Type in your git repository URL (ending with `.git`).
    * Select the credentials you created earlier from the credentials drop-down field. If you select the 
    correct credentials, you should not see a Jenkins login error message.
    * Click the `Generate Pipeline Script` button. 
    * Copy-and-paste the generated code into your Jenkinsfile.

.Example:
----
git credentialsId: 'c868a19a-3de9-4ae1-9538-b832fd1c8b12', url: 'https://github.com/seis665/assignment-11-jasondbaker.git'
----

Your Jenkinsfile will have three stages: `Setup`, `Build` and `Test`. The `Setup` stage will clone a copy of the assignment GitHub repository (using the git code snippet above). It will also copy a webpage file from an S3 bucket into the project workspace. The `Build` stage will use a Dockerfile to build a new Docker image. Finally, the `Test` stage will create a new Docker container using the Docker image and test it to see if it is working properly.

Let's look at the requirements for each of these stages.

=== The Setup stage

Create an HTML file called `classweb.html` with the following contents:

    <html>
    <body>
      <h1>My class webserver</h1>
    </body>
    </html>

Store this file in an S3 bucket in the us-east-1 region. The `Setup` stage of the pipeline will copy the `classweb.html` file from the S3 bucket into a file called `index.html` in the workspace.

=== The Build Stage

The `Build` stage will use a Dockerfile to create a new container image called `classweb` with a tag of `1.0`. Here are the configuration requirements for the Docker image:

  * The new image must be based off the `nginx` image.
  * Set the maintainer of the image to your name and email address.
  * The image should expose port 80.
  * Copy the `index.html` which was downloaded from S3 to the /usr/share/nginx/html directory in the container.

=== The Test Stage

The `Test` stage will validate that the Docker image was created properly. The pipeline should create a new container called `classweb1` using the image built in the previous stage. The container should have the following configuration settings:

  * The container should run in a detached (daemon) mode.
  * The container should map port 80 within the container to port 80 on the host server.
  * The container should have an environment variable mapping the key `NGINX_PORT` to the value `80`.

After launching the container, the pipeline should test the container using the curl command. The container is running on the Jenkins slave node, so you should make an HTTP request to the private IP address of that node.

  curl -s <private IP address>

Finally, once the test completes the pipeline should stop and delete the container.

=== Console Output

Once you have the pipeline working properly, copy the console output from the last 
successful build into a file called `console.txt` and check it into the GitHub repository.

=== Check your work

Here is what the contents of your git repository should look like before final submission:

====
&#x2523; Dockerfile +
&#x2523; Jenkinsfile +
&#x2517; console.txt +

====


=== Terminate application environment

The last step in the assignment is to terminate your CloudFormation stack on AWS.

== Submitting your assignment
I will review your published work on GitHub after the homework due date.
