assignments/assignment-10.adoc, before:

:doctype: article
:blank: pass:[ +]

:sectnums!:

= SEIS 665 Assignment 10: Code pipeline
Jason Baker <bake2352@stthomas.edu>
1.0, 8/15/2016

== Overview
A DevOps code pipeline helps to automate continuous delivery processes for software development organizations. Developers, testers, and operations staff depend on a functioning pipeline to transform code changes into deployable software releases. While software developers are the primary users of the pipeline, IT operations professionals oftentimes have to maintain it.

In this week's assignment, you will build a complete code deployment pipeline using AWS CodePipeline (a continuous delivery service) and AWS CodeDeploy (an automated application deployment service). The application you will deploy is a Java application running on a Tomcat server platform.

This assignment is based off the Pipeline Starter Kit developed by AWS. You won't need to figure out how to build the code pipeline. Much of the hard work has been done for you. Once the code pipeline is running, you will make a change to the application code and watch the pipeline deploy the updated application to a staging and production server.

== Requirements

You need to have a personal AWS account and GitHub account for this assignment.

== The assignment

Let's get that code pipeline flowing!

=== Fork the Tomcat application

The first step in the assignment is to fork the GitHub repository containing the Tomcat application. Forking the repository will setup a copy of the repository in your personal GitHub account. You can then make changes to the application files in the repository without affecting the parent repository.

Go to GitHub and fork the following repository by clicking on the *Fork* button:

  https://github.com/seis665/aws-codedeploy-sample-tomcat

Next, in order to connect AWS CodePipeline to your personal GitHub repository you will need to provide AWS with a GitHub access token. This token provides AWS with the access credentials needed to fetch code updates from your personal repositories.

Navigate to the following website:

  https://github.com/settings/tokens

Generate a personal token with the *repo* and *admin:repo_hook* permissions selected (see below). Copy the token to your clipboard and store it in a safe place -- perhaps something like a text file. You will need to copy this token into a CloudFormation input shortly.

image:../images/assignment10/github-token-permissions.png["600","600"]

=== Launch the stack

You will use a CloudFormation template to launch a stack containing the code pipeline and all of the production resources into the us-east-1 region. The template creates the following components:

* An AWS Virtual Private Cloud (VPC), including all the necessary routing tables and routes, an Internet gateway, and network ACLs for EC2 instances to be launched into.

* An Amazon EC2 instance that hosts a Jenkins server (also installed and configured for you).

* Two AWS CodeDeploy applications, each of which contains a deployment group that deploys to a single Amazon EC2 instance.

* All IAM service and instance roles required to run the resources.

* A pipeline in AWS CodePipeline that builds the sample application and deploys it. This includes creating an Amazon S3 bucket to use as the artifact store for this pipeline.

Go to the AWS CloudFormation console and select the *Create Stack* button.

Choose a stack template by specifying the following S3 template URL:

  https://s3.amazonaws.com/seis665/aws-codedeploy-codepipeline-starter-kit.template

On the *Specify Details* page, enter the following:

1. In *Stack name*, type a name for the stack. Choose something short and simple for easy reference.
2. In *AppName*, you can leave the default as-is. Note that if you decide to launch this stack multiple times in your account, you will need to set the Appname to a different name each time.
3. In *AppSourceType*, choose GitHub.
4. In the *Application Source - GitHub* section, type the name of your GitHub username in the *GitHubUser* field.
5. In *GitHubToken*, paste the GitHub token you created earlier.
6. In *GitHubRepoName*, leave the repo name set to aws-codedeploy-sample-tomcat.
7. In *GitHubBranchName*, leave the branch name set to master.
8. In *Key Name*, choose the name of your Amazon EC2 key pair.
9. In *YourIP*, type the public IP address (appending /32) of the computer system which you will access the resources created by this template. If you do not know your current public IP address, you can open up a new web browser window and go to the URL: http://checkip.amazonaws.com/

Click the *Next* button.

On the *Options* page you can tag the resources created by the template. Feel free to create whatever tag you would like and click *Next*.

On the *Review* page, select the *I acknowledge that this template might cause AWS CloudFormation to create IAM resources check box*. (It will.) Review the other settings, and then choose *Create*.

It will take several minutes for CloudFormation to create the resources on your behalf. You can watch the progress messages on the *Events* tab in the console. When the stack has been created, you will see a CREATE_COMPLETE message in the *Status* column of the console and on the *Overview* tab.

Congratulations! You've created a code pipeline. The pipeline contains four different stages, and it will start automatically as soon as it is created.

[NOTE]
====
If CloudFormation fails to create your resources and pipeline, it will roll back all resource creation automatically.
====

=== Working with the Pipeline

Open the AWS CodePipeline console to view your new pipeline. On the dashboard page, choose the name of the pipeline. You can watch the progress of your pipeline as it completes the action configured for each of its four stages (a source stage, a build stage, and two deployment stages).

image:../images/assignment10/code-pipeline.png["600","200"]

The pipeline flows as follows:

1. The source stage contains an action that retrieves the application from the the GitHub repo you specified.
2. The build stage contains an action that builds the app in Jenkins, which is hosted on an Amazon EC2 instance.
3. The first deploy stage contains an action that uses AWS CodeDeploy to deploy the app to a beta website on an Amazon EC2 instance.
4. The second deploy stage contains an action that again uses AWS CodeDeploy to deploy the app, this time to a separate, production website on a different Amazon EC2 instance.

When each stage is complete, it turns from blue (in progress) to green (success).

You can view the details of any stage except the source stage by choosing the *Details* link for that stage. For example, choosing the *Details* link for the Jenkins build action in the build stage opens the status page for that Jenkins build. Click on the Jenkins details link now. Notice how the Jenkins server web page opens in your browser. Next, click on the *Console Output* link on the Jenkins server. This output log displays the build information for the Tomcat application.

When the *Succeeded* status is displayed for the pipeline status, you can view the application that was built and deployed by the pipeline:

1. In the status area for the *ProdDeploy* action in the *Prod* stage, choose *Details*. The details of the deployment will appear in the AWS CodeDeploy console in a separate browser window.
2. In the Deployment Details section of the CodeDeploy console, click on the instance ID of the successfully deployed instance. The EC2 console will appear in another browser window.
3. Finally, on the instance Description tab, copy the Public DNS address  and then paste it into the address bar of your web browser. The address will look something like: ec2-52-90-152-35.compute-1.amazonaws.com

Your browser should open the Tomcat website on the production server. Aw, hope you like cute dogs!

image:../images/assignment10/code-deploy-website.jpg["600","600"]

=== Modify the application

Let's modify the Tomcat application and watch the pipeline automatically rebuild and deploy the application.

You can modify the application code in two different ways. You could clone the application repository to your desktop and modify the code files with your favorite text editor, commit the update to your local repository, and push the new code commit back up to GitHub.

An easier option for this assignment is to use the web editor on the GitHub site to make a change to a file.

Browse to the following path in the application repository on GitHub:

  aws-codedeploy-sample-tomcat/src/main/webapp/WEB-INF/pages/index.jsp

Click on the *Edit* button to edit the index.jsp file. Locate code line 39 and change the word "Bespoke" to "Fancy". Next, scroll to the bottom of the page and commit the file change to the repository.

Now, go back to the AWS CodePipeline console and take a look at your pipeline. You may have to refresh the page a couple times over the course of a few minutes. You should see your code pipeline automatically fetch the change that you made to the application repository. Watch as the pipeline moves your code change through each of the pipeline stages.

When the pipeline completes the deployment of the application to *Prod*, refresh the browser window pointing to the deployed website on the production server. You should see your code change. How cool is that!

=== Check your work

Here is what the contents of your git repository should look like before final submission:

====
&#x2523; jenkins-screen.jpg +
&#x2517; stack.json +
====

=== Save your work

Go to the AWS CodePipeline console and click on the *Details* link in the Build stage to pull up the Jenkins server website. Next, select the *Back to Project* link on the Jenkins menu. You should see a webpage with the header *Maven project app-name*. Take a screenshot of this browser page and save it in a file called `jenkins-screen.jpg` or `jenkins-screen.png` on your desktop. The file must be either a JPEG or PNG file. No other file formats are accepted.

Create a new GitHub Classroom repository by clicking on this link: https://classroom.github.com/assignment-invitations/874ccbb14cf1edafbdf104af22f7812f

Commit your Jenkins screenshot file into the repository.

Also, shell into the JenkinsServer instance and use the AWS API to retrieve a list of your stack resources in JSON format (use the `cloudformation describe-stack-resources` command). Store the output of this API command in a file called `stack.json` and commit this file into the repository.

=== Terminate application environment

The last step in the assignment is to delete all the AWS resources created by the stack. You don't want to keep this stack running for a long time because the costs will accumulate.

Go to the CloudFormation dashboard, select your running stack, and choose the
delete option. Watch as CloudFormation deletes all the resources previously
created.

Note, CloudFormation does not remove an S3 bucket that it created. That's probably because it cannot delete a bucket that contains files. Go to the S3 console and locate a bucket that is named something like *demo-us-east-1-916700618655-app-name*. Select the bucket and chose the *Empty Bucket* action. Finally, delete the bucket from S3.

== Submitting your assignment
I will review your published work on GitHub after the homework due date.

Commit message:

minor updates to lecture 5 and rewrite assignment 10

assignments/assignment-10.adoc, after:

:doctype: article
:blank: pass:[ +]

:sectnums!:

= SEIS 665 Assignment 10: Code pipeline
Jason Baker <bake2352@stthomas.edu>
1.0, 8/15/2016

== Overview
A DevOps code pipeline helps to automate continuous delivery processes for software development organizations. Developers, testers, and operations staff depend on functioning pipelines to transform code changes into deployable software releases. While software developers are the primary users of a pipeline, IT operations professionals oftentimes have to maintain it.

In this week's assignment, you will build a code deployment pipeline using Jenkins, a continuous integration tool. The pipeline will build, test, and deploy a very simple Java application.

This assignment is based off the Jenkins pipeline we created in class, so you can refer back to the lecture notes to build parts of the pipeline.

== Requirements

You need to have a personal AWS account and GitHub account for this assignment.

== The assignment

Let's get that code pipeline flowing!

=== Fork the Java application

The first step in the assignment is to fork the GitHub repository containing the Java application. Forking the repository will setup a copy of the repository in your personal GitHub account. You can then make changes to the application files in the repository without affecting the original (parent) repository.

Go to GitHub and fork the following repository by clicking on the *Fork* button:

  https://github.com/seis665/java-project

After a short period of time you should see a forked copy of this repository in your personal GitHub account.

=== Launch the stack

You will use a CloudFormation template to launch a stack containing a Jenkins server.

* An AWS Virtual Private Cloud (VPC), including all the necessary routing tables and routes, an Internet gateway, and network ACLs for EC2 instances to be launched into.

* An Amazon EC2 instance that hosts a Jenkins server (also installed and configured for you).

* Two AWS CodeDeploy applications, each of which contains a deployment group that deploys to a single Amazon EC2 instance.

* All IAM service and instance roles required to run the resources.

* A pipeline in AWS CodePipeline that builds the sample application and deploys it. This includes creating an Amazon S3 bucket to use as the artifact store for this pipeline.

Go to the AWS CloudFormation console and select the *Create Stack* button.

Choose a stack template by specifying the following S3 template URL:

  https://s3.amazonaws.com/seis665/jenkins-cf.json

On the *Specify Details* page, enter the following:

1. In *Stack name*, type a name for the stack. Choose something short and simple for easy reference.
2. In *JenkinsPassword*, provide an administrative password for this system (choose a hard password).
3. In *JenkinsUsername*, you can leave this set to `admin` or choose a different admin username.
4. In *Key Name*, choose the name of your Amazon EC2 key pair.
5. In *YourIP*, type the public IP address (appending /32) of the computer system which you will access the resources created by this template. If you do not know your current public IP address, you can open up a new web browser window and go to the URL: http://checkip.amazonaws.com/

Click the *Next* button.

On the *Options* page you can tag the resources created by the template. Feel free to create whatever tag you would like and click *Next*.

On the *Review* page, select the *I acknowledge that this template might cause AWS CloudFormation to create IAM resources check box*. (It will.) Review the other settings, and then choose *Create*.

It will take several minutes for CloudFormation to create the resources on your behalf. You can watch the progress messages on the *Events* tab in the console. When the stack has been created, you will see a CREATE_COMPLETE message in the *Status* column of the console and on the *Overview* tab.

Congratulations! You've created a code pipeline. The pipeline contains four different stages, and it will start automatically as soon as it is created.

[NOTE]
====
If CloudFormation fails to create your resources and pipeline, it will roll back all resource creation automatically.
====

=== Working with the Pipeline

Open the AWS CodePipeline console to view your new pipeline. On the dashboard page, choose the name of the pipeline. You can watch the progress of your pipeline as it completes the action configured for each of its four stages (a source stage, a build stage, and two deployment stages).

image:../images/assignment10/code-pipeline.png["600","200"]

The pipeline flows as follows:

1. The source stage contains an action that retrieves the application from the the GitHub repo you specified.
2. The build stage contains an action that builds the app in Jenkins, which is hosted on an Amazon EC2 instance.
3. The first deploy stage contains an action that uses AWS CodeDeploy to deploy the app to a beta website on an Amazon EC2 instance.
4. The second deploy stage contains an action that again uses AWS CodeDeploy to deploy the app, this time to a separate, production website on a different Amazon EC2 instance.

When each stage is complete, it turns from blue (in progress) to green (success).

You can view the details of any stage except the source stage by choosing the *Details* link for that stage. For example, choosing the *Details* link for the Jenkins build action in the build stage opens the status page for that Jenkins build. Click on the Jenkins details link now. Notice how the Jenkins server web page opens in your browser. Next, click on the *Console Output* link on the Jenkins server. This output log displays the build information for the Tomcat application.

When the *Succeeded* status is displayed for the pipeline status, you can view the application that was built and deployed by the pipeline:

1. In the status area for the *ProdDeploy* action in the *Prod* stage, choose *Details*. The details of the deployment will appear in the AWS CodeDeploy console in a separate browser window.
2. In the Deployment Details section of the CodeDeploy console, click on the instance ID of the successfully deployed instance. The EC2 console will appear in another browser window.
3. Finally, on the instance Description tab, copy the Public DNS address  and then paste it into the address bar of your web browser. The address will look something like: ec2-52-90-152-35.compute-1.amazonaws.com

Your browser should open the Tomcat website on the production server. Aw, hope you like cute dogs!

image:../images/assignment10/code-deploy-website.jpg["600","600"]

=== Modify the application

Let's modify the Tomcat application and watch the pipeline automatically rebuild and deploy the application.

You can modify the application code in two different ways. You could clone the application repository to your desktop and modify the code files with your favorite text editor, commit the update to your local repository, and push the new code commit back up to GitHub.

An easier option for this assignment is to use the web editor on the GitHub site to make a change to a file.

Browse to the following path in the application repository on GitHub:

  aws-codedeploy-sample-tomcat/src/main/webapp/WEB-INF/pages/index.jsp

Click on the *Edit* button to edit the index.jsp file. Locate code line 39 and change the word "Bespoke" to "Fancy". Next, scroll to the bottom of the page and commit the file change to the repository.

Now, go back to the AWS CodePipeline console and take a look at your pipeline. You may have to refresh the page a couple times over the course of a few minutes. You should see your code pipeline automatically fetch the change that you made to the application repository. Watch as the pipeline moves your code change through each of the pipeline stages.

When the pipeline completes the deployment of the application to *Prod*, refresh the browser window pointing to the deployed website on the production server. You should see your code change. How cool is that!

=== Check your work

Here is what the contents of your git repository should look like before final submission:

====
&#x2523; jenkins-screen.jpg +
&#x2517; stack.json +
====

=== Save your work

Go to the AWS CodePipeline console and click on the *Details* link in the Build stage to pull up the Jenkins server website. Next, select the *Back to Project* link on the Jenkins menu. You should see a webpage with the header *Maven project app-name*. Take a screenshot of this browser page and save it in a file called `jenkins-screen.jpg` or `jenkins-screen.png` on your desktop. The file must be either a JPEG or PNG file. No other file formats are accepted.

Create a new GitHub Classroom repository by clicking on this link: https://classroom.github.com/assignment-invitations/874ccbb14cf1edafbdf104af22f7812f

Commit your Jenkins screenshot file into the repository.

Also, shell into the JenkinsServer instance and use the AWS API to retrieve a list of your stack resources in JSON format (use the `cloudformation describe-stack-resources` command). Store the output of this API command in a file called `stack.json` and commit this file into the repository.

=== Terminate application environment

The last step in the assignment is to delete all the AWS resources created by the stack. You don't want to keep this stack running for a long time because the costs will accumulate.

Go to the CloudFormation dashboard, select your running stack, and choose the
delete option. Watch as CloudFormation deletes all the resources previously
created.

Note, CloudFormation does not remove an S3 bucket that it created. That's probably because it cannot delete a bucket that contains files. Go to the S3 console and locate a bucket that is named something like *demo-us-east-1-916700618655-app-name*. Select the bucket and chose the *Empty Bucket* action. Finally, delete the bucket from S3.

== Submitting your assignment
I will review your published work on GitHub after the homework due date.
